Hello how's it going?
Everybody has joined early.
I want to be setting up my adjusting
things.
Looks like my lighting is terrible.
Hello and welcome everybody.
Welcome everybody to CS-450 were also
crossed the certain number of other
departments.
Yeah, so today I want to go through
some administrative things to tell you
a little bit about the course as well
as get started with the first lecture.
Please let me know if there is any
technical issues in terms of hearing me
or otherwise.
Guarantee that there will be lots of
technical issues throughout the
semester.
But will try to do our best to deliver
the course as it is kind of usually OK.
Let me start by perhaps sharing screen
and taking you through a little bit of
the web page.
I am telling you a bit about the
course, so this is the relate webpage.
So relate is a course web system design
primarily by Andreas Kloeckner, who is
a set of computing faculty here in
computer science, and it's it was
designed with kind of actually numerics
courses in mind.
So it was designed for this type of
course, and it's extremely convenient,
so all of the assignments will be doing
and actually even your exams will be
through relate and all information.
Will be posted here so I see someone
more taps here because I'm going to
structure then you guys do.
You should see like participant in
grading.
Maybe probably not content but
innocence.
All assignments will be here and OK.
Let me return to the types of
assignments.
Will have the other thing you want to
definitely make use of this piaza and
some things will be will be actually
another computer.
For example, for example.
Typically when like exam grades come
out, that's analysen Piazza.
So keep an eye out on and also any
questions you have please post there
including my questions for core staff
that are kind of personal, such as if
you want an exception for something.
I would encourage you to use Piazza
private messages for and send it to all
instructors, not just to me, so that GS
might also be able to help out with
your request.
Yeah, so kind of process is better than
email.
Essentially in all cases because it
gives us a centralized way to keep
track of questions.
And while private questions are good
for kind of personal things, I would
encourage you to ask questions kind of
publicly and so that other students can
also answer and also see answers if
you're actually asking about technical
content.
So whether it be about the lectures or
about a homework quiz.
Courage to make it kind of a public
question.
You generally shouldn't actually share
like your code, period, so we're kind
of ask for such specific help, but
we're generally going to be kind of
happy to give you feedback and hints on
questions and stuff like that, provided
that the question kind of shows some
level understanding.
So in terms of the course, so it's kind
of structured into chapters which are
derived from a book by Mike Heath.
My Keith is a professor emeritus here,
and Mike is kind of responsible for the
original design of the course, as well
as having having written a textbook and
lecture notes for this course.
So I actually my day learned took this
course as an undergraduate here and
kind of learn much of it through Mikes
notes.
That didn't stop me, however, from once
I got here of creating my own notes,
which are a bit different, in large
part because.
Kind of both.
One way I try to lecture is by actually
writing things out as opposed to
working with slides in the background.
And this is this kind of forces things
to go a little slower as well as gives
time to kind of show derivations which
are very difficult to understand from a
slide.
My lecture notes also include some
additional things, although the Mikes
notes will include things that might do
not give you just a quick example,
let's see.
These are my case notes and they
essentially you can read this almost
like a textbook.
So kind of there quite complete and I'm
very precise and they contain basically
no mistakes, so I iterations of
teaching this course.
Nobody has reported mistakenly slides.
My slides will certainly contain some
mistakes because they're relatively
new, but these have kind of seen many
rounds of many iterations of the
course, so there are well developed,
very well organized.
And a great reference.
My notes provide some kind of
additional stuff, and they're also just
different, so it's a different
perspective on many of the same things,
and in some cases I made use of what
Mike actually has in his sights.
For example, he has a background very
similar to this, while in other cases
I'll actually have insights and
analysis that Mike doesn't cover.
But the topics are actually fairly well
defined and aren't too different, and
in fact you can also find lecture notes
from previous instructors for the
course.
So Andreas Klockner in particular has
developed his own set of notes as well,
and so if you want multiple, I would
encourage you to look at all of those.
You might also be able to find videos
of.
Lectures by Andreas and possibly by
Mike, but I'm not sure actually about
how widely available letters of
previous iterations of the course.
If you're interested in kind of
actually following a different
structure through the same content.
So this kind of course outline will
contain not just the notes, so also it
contains a writing template.
So as will go through.
I'll be kind of writing in on a blank
version of these notes, and so if you
want to follow along and take notes,
you can also use these, and for each
one of these should be available.
If you click this little triangle in
outline.
Similarly, throughout the class will in
class go through some demos, although
not necessarily all of the demos that
you see here.
These demos are primarily have
primarily been developed by Andres
cleaner, but also the contribution,
something from Luke and some for
myself.
And you can kind of just click list to
view the demo as an HTML page, but you
can't actually run anything.
You can also download the Python script
or the Jupiter notebook and run it with
Python.
So Speaking of Python, everything in
this course will be Python based and
there is at the very end here some
resources about kind of generally
learning about Python.
Python is an easy language to learn if
you kind of have programming
experience, which I just ate in this
class is pretty much everybody has
some.
And it's fairly convenient for it's
convenient for numerics.
And that kind of you should generally
be able to learn as we go along.
Kind of the initial things will do with
Python are fairly basic.
But and they kind of primarily look
like linear algebra.
So actually I think I'm understanding
the syntax of the code will usually not
be the challenge for folks in this
course course.
We're not really doing too much
complicated in terms of data
structures, but we are doing kind of
mathematics with code, and the
mathematics is always offering the hard
part.
OK, more about that right?
So in terms of actually writing Python
code, this is where relate is really
helpful.
So actually through relate you can
develop Python code through the browser
and it actually even provides you
different types of editors.
So if you use something like them or
Emacs, you can actually use that type
of syntax and develop a kind of the
code through the browser.
Then you can submit the code to get
feedback on the results and get some
amount of feedback.
As well as kind of keeps admitting that
until you get all the credit and then
actually finally submit your
assignment.
So generally will have some such coding
questions on homeworks and there will
be will plan to have especially BI
Weekly Homeworks, although will skip
weeks on which there is exams, which is
something we haven't done in past
semesters but trying to reduce the load
this semester of it.
So will also have quizzes and the
quizzes are going to be due by Electro
time for central every lecture unless
there is an example and or possibly if
there's something else too.
Maybe we'll skip it.
These quizzes are intended to kind of
keep everybody on track with what's
going on and to provide some kind of
questions to work through after each
lecture.
And I thought about what weather to
modify this in light of the fact that
the word teaching remotely and there's
a pandemic going on.
But I actually think that the structure
of these ad is valuable.
So I think what will do is that just to
try to make them a little bit kind of
easier than in the past.
In the past, we've had these.
Typically how 1 short code coding
question at the end I'm thinking of not
having essentially any coding questions
and also not having any questions on
the exams, but this is maybe not final.
Maybe will sneak in some easy coding
questions.
Because they do kind of offer value
that otherwise it multiple choice
questions.
It's hard to sometimes capture.
But kind of, that's one of the ways in
which I'm going to try to make this
semester a little bit later.
While still, however, trying to kind of
maintain the content of the course
usually delivers as well as the kind of
regular evaluations that provides,
because I think they're actually very
valuable for students to kind of know
that they're spaced kind of staying on
top, of course.
OK.
Other things about the course, yeah, so
there's already a quiz due for the next
lecture on Wednesday.
This quiz is just about the course
policies, so I'd encourage you to take
a quick look and then complete the
policies.
They talk about things like the kind of
late homework submission.
So for both quizzes and for homework so
you can submit them a few days late and
receive partial credit.
In particular 50% credit if you for any
reason you kind of were unable to
complete the quiz or homework on time,
or especially if you foresee.
Being unable to complete it, let us
know and we'll find a way to give you
extra time.
This semester will be more flexible
than previous semesters for all the
obvious reasons.
However, if you kind of.
Ask us a week after the exam.
With that, you kind of missed exam.
We probably can't help with something
like that, so there's still kind of a
limit to just how much we can do.
I see maybe question in the chat, how
long will each quiz typically take so
each quiz?
Should.
The issue it's not intended to take
long, it's just going to be multiple
choice questions, but you might run
into questions that force you to go
back and look at the lecture notes and
kind of thing.
So it might vary, but the intention is
that kind of they should be less than
an hour.
But yeah, kind of one of the goals that
they service to kind of expose
potential gaps that you might have in
terms of understanding, so you might
need to go back and kind of re study
and that might take a little longer,
but that would be a good thing, but
they're not.
They're not super technical or kind of
kind of complicated questions that you
have to do lots of calculations for
something, so they should be reasonably
straightforward.
Do the quest points get added up to the
final grade?
So yeah, so that.
Quizzes are part of the grade, but they
are a small part and you also have
multiple attempts for each quiz, so you
can actually try once.
See what you got wrong.
Try again so the intention is that you
essentially should be able to get full
credit for these online quizzes as long
as you stay on top of the deadlines.
Although there's also high incentive to
not really just wait until the final
try for the quiz and try everything,
but they actually think through the
questions because the types of
questions you see on the quizzes are
the same as what you'll see in the
examines.
So the exam will also be kind of
multiple choice or kind of number entry
type questions and so these are these
quizzes are the primary source of
practice that you get.
For example, it's an exam list will be
worth more of your great.
That said, kind of the homework is
still worth a lot and kind of none of
the final or none of the examples will
kind of by themselves, kind of force
you to fail the course if you don't do
that well, so I hope that this kind of
great balance is reasonable.
So both quizzes and homeworks will be
posted and unrelated.
Yes, correct.
So will post everything on this relate
web page.
So if you just stay on top of that you
should be able to find all assignments.
So for quizzes.
We won't post these 24 hours before the
deadline, which is not.
I understand that's not a lot of hours.
I will try to post them, give you even
more time in particular.
So if like will try to post on Monday
afternoon the quiz due on Wednesday or
by Monday afternoon there.
But sometimes we do need a little bit
of extra time.
A big reason is that the quiz is meant
to reflect the material we covered in
lecture, and I often don't know just
how far we will get a lecture.
So then it requires some adjustment of
the quiz right after it's released.
And then there's always a short fuse
deadline between on Monday assigned
quiz due Wednesday.
On the other hand, when we assign a
quiz due Monday, you should have more
time.
So hopefully that's OK.
If for any reason you're not able to
complete the quiz in a lot of time, let
us know and we'll give you an
extension.
So in total, for example, yes, three
example it's and one final exam.
And will exams be close book?
Or can we take notes?
The exams will be closed book and they
will be done through CBT off which
offers.
So this is kind of a proctoring service
offered by the College of Engineering.
I think it's seems to be the better
option and pretty much anything else
available, but there is so the plan
right now is to have the exam.
Let's be an hour.
15 minutes long and to start at 9:00 AM
to 10:50.
So that starts half an hour earlier
than the course.
So like this is during course time but
30 minutes earlier.
If you actually have a different course
or some other, there's another reason
that you can't make this time on a
regular basis.
Let me know.
I'm actually curious if this will cause
a lot of problems, because if so, I
think we I can talk to CTF and possibly
we can change this to be just purely
within course time.
But then the exam will probably be
shorter, so not an hour and 15 minutes,
but somebody 5 minutes or something or
not.
Wanna half.
But this is kind of the default that
CBT have gave us when asking, and I
think this will probably make most
people happy because it's just longer.
But if it turns out that there's some
other queries 8:00 to 9:30 and a lot of
people have a conflict with this, let
me know and maybe will actually make a
change.
But right now I think this is probably.
A good idea, because there's also
conflict exam times.
So CTF will kind of automatically
schedule conflict exams on 8:00 AM and
8:00 PM that day.
So if you need to reschedule to one of
those, that should be relatively easy.
However, for any kind of rescheduling
or conflict, I believe we need to
prove, I think for some of them, maybe
they'll be automatically approved, but
generally don't assume that you can
kind of do this late and we try to stay
ahead of time and let CBT up now, and
I'll kind of generally approve complex
as long as there are reasonable.
I think these are also not the only
conflict, so if you just can't make the
example that day, you can take it on a
different day.
It's also a little bit annoying that
the conflict is at 8:00 AM versus 9:00
AM, but this is the these times are
kind of fixed.
Let's see if there's more questions.
Facilities in person.
You do not have to go anywhere in
person, so the CTF will is a proctoring
service.
So what they'll do is actually proctoru
over zoom and what you'll need to do is
to set up a cell phone or something
else to point at your you and your
computer screen and there will be a
Proctor who is there who is not related
to the poor, so they can't really
answer questions, although if you run
into a technical issue you should
record it with them and they'll kind of
watch you to make sure that.
Only viewing the kind of the web page
are allowed to view, which is
essentially they relate.
Age and they are familiar with how what
kind of relate infrastructure to the
best of my knowledge at least they have
been in the past.
So let's see the answer, the actual
question.
Online.
Yeah, I guess there it's close book.
In the past we've also had just closed
book exams in kind of physical CBT
facilities, so this is not all that
different and the exam will just be
through there relate system.
We can also offer in Proctor exams
outside of CTF if it ever becomes
necessary.
So there's lots of these work arounds,
but hopefully the standard CTF thing
will actually serve us quite well.
Yeah.
Did I miss any other question with me?
Is there any final project or anything
like that?
There is not a final project.
Your one thing, so there actually used
to be a final project for the four
credit hours section.
What I've done in kind of in planning
to do this here again is to just have
extra homework assignments for the four
credit hours section.
There is a caveat to this in that I
think the four credit hours section has
been restricted to graduate only, while
the three quarter section has been
restricted to undergraduate only.
I notice that just this morning by
looking at essentially who's registered
for both.
This is not actually my intention or
desire because I think.
The actual difference between three and
four credit hours sections is kind of
some extra more technical material, and
so the extra credit hours for students
who want to dive a little bit deeper
into the course.
We, who are not necessarily graduate
students.
I think I do know that there are some
programs that require the full credit.
Our version of the course.
And do the graduate programs, but I'll
actually make a request that the
restrictions on the sections be lifted.
So if you're an undergraduate and you
want to take the forfeited, our version
of the course and complete these extra
assignments, that's great.
And if you're a graduate student but
you want to take the three credit hour
version of the course and have kind of.
A lighter version of kind of assignment
load that's also totally fine with me,
it's just that are I think the system
was locked into this other mode.
Last two times we also had to ask to
make the change, but it seems it
doesn't carry over to you semesters.
Yep, so yeah, I guess I've already
mentioned this for credit everything,
so for that section will have some
additional homework questions.
I think I'm not yet sure exactly when
these will come over in what form.
In the past we had.
In a sense, one homework that was kind
of an addendum homework for the full
credit hours section for every
throughout our homework and homework
would have like one question or so.
I think.
Maybe I want to do a little bit less
this semester again because it's just
there's a pandemic going on.
But we'll see exactly how, but there
will be some homework questions coming
that are extra.
Since the 4th grade with those kind of
mean that we get 33% more kind of
credit for the course than the three
credit hours does, formally speaking.
Other questions that I'm making list.
Do we have homework for every week so
Homeworks will be assigned?
BI weekly.
I think my plan was to assign homework
this week, do 2 weeks from now and to
kind of keep assigning homework
whenever one is do.
Unless there is an exam the following
week and then skip a week to give you
kind of a weekend or so to study for
the exam.
The current plan is to have home runs
do as they were before and Friday
evenings so you will be assigned
homework on Friday evening and it would
be do kind of two weeks from that time.
Assuming we actually get it out on
time, which hopefully will stay on top
of that.
Yeah, so that's kind of the plan.
This is this is a in the intention is
that this is a somewhat lighter load of
Homer extent in previous semesters.
However, the quizzes are stating just
as regular, so hopefully this gives
everybody a chance to stay on top of
the course.
I think.
Kind of if there's too few things going
on that lines were too loose.
It's kind of easy to postpone kind of
studying.
And of course like this, and that's not
really great.
So hopefully this is a good structure.
Us, somebody asked if there's any
difference between essentially
different sections.
No, there's absolutely no difference.
So except for the three versus 4 credit
hour version, and I think for no matter
whether you were kind of register mass
yes or ECE, there should be three and
four credit hour versions.
I think each one of those has been
assigned like some number of fixed
slots, so if it looks like this section
is full, just send me an email and
we'll figure it out like they were
nowhere near capacity.
I think there's something like 150 wild
capacities 200.
It's a zoom call anyway, so in a sense
we should be able to get you into the
course into the right section.
If you're already, then we can also do
that later and in the Meanwhile you can
start and work through everything.
One thing you should do is to actually
create an account on relate and that
will allow you to access everything
here to create an account and relate
well.
You really don't even need account, you
can just log in through your.
Not ID and password, so hasn't
implication system that goes through
University of Illinois.
And once you registered for the course
in this way, then you can actually
complete all the assignments and submit
them, and we're going to kind of just
great Norman stuff without actually
checking who is who is actually
registered at that time.
So the time you registration actually
important is maybe once the exams come.
So which is like in late February?
Because I think TF.
Maybe will require that students be
officially registered, but by that time
hopefully all these issues with
sections are sorted out.
Let's see any further questions.
Are there quizzes?
Hi Miss period the previous stuff are
there unlimited attempts for quizzes
there is not.
I forget exactly, so I think we have
three atoms.
Pretty sure.
Let's see what their policy say.
3 go to the top step of these, one with
the higher grade will count.
So for multiple choice questions this
is almost unlimited attempts because
you can tell what you got wrong when
you first attempt and so forth, so
hopefully that's good.
Let's see other questions.
I think I got everything.
Let me know if I missed something.
Right and then the other thing I want
to show you is.
Let's wait on that first, second.
Anything else about the web page they
need to say so will post.
All lectures will be recorded.
So also this is being recorded and
things will be posted on media space.
So kind of I would encourage you to
maybe.
Yeah, so like things will be available
asynchronously if you need them.
There will sometimes be in class
activities which you can complete
through relate and usually will be like
kind of coding questions.
Those will generally not be for credit,
but I will also post them probably in
outline.
So if you want to kind of take a look
at the questions offline if you're not
physically attending, not attending
lectures synchronously.
We those will be available to.
I think that's.
Most administrative things that I
wanted to mention.
Any questions on that type of thing?
OK.
So then let me stop sharing.
So let's so I want to show you one
thing here and then I'm going to switch
to shame screen on my notebook where.
I'm ranked so the way I would actually
prefer that questions be asked, because
Zoom chat has.
Various issues, and in particular when
I'm sharing screen writing on
something, it's generally I'm not able
to see the questions.
I don't really get notifications, so to
make sure I actually the question right
away.
If you have a technical question about
what I'm doing, especially use this
send instant message feature.
And if you click here.
If it works, let's see.
I just slow, so if you type a message
here it will actually appear on
directly on my screen on my on my
notebook.
So I'm going to 2nd type test and click
send.
But before that let me stop sharing
this screen and start sharing my screen
here.
So now I'm going to send a message
saying, hi Edgar.
And after some lag.
Selected twice a message appears right
here.
And so this way you can ask questions
in a way that's anonymous to everybody
else.
Although there is some log.
If I if something needs to be checked.
And it will write away appear here.
So I will see your question right away
so that instant message feature through
late is.
I think a good way to ask questions.
We actually also used in life course
rooms like in physical lectures and it
was working well.
It is also feel free to use this chat,
although that I may not see it right
away or to just kind of.
Interrupt me, perhaps an ask the
question.
Hopefully that will.
Work, but I understand that we assume
this is kind of tricky.
I will also, as a result, generally
probably be asking all of you last
questions as throughout the courses I
wouldn't normally in a physical lecture
because it just is the case.
It is more difficult and to kind of
answer questions back and forth and in
a quick web.
I see more questions.
I do not see the demos from the website
will be posted up through the lectures.
I think the downloads are should
already be posted.
So maybe also maybe refresh the page.
I just updated it this morning, added
demos, including some other changes.
If you still cannot access the demo, so
let me know.
The office hours are actually not just
yet posted that will be posted this
afternoon, so we only have our first
team meeting at 1:00 PM today.
So that's when I will be quitting the
GS.
But one they can.
Have office hours so kind of keep an
eye on and that will be posted this
afternoon.
Yeah, good questions.
OK, any other questions?
OK, so then, let's actually begin
talking a little bit about course
content, and perhaps first motivating
the course a little bit, as well as
saying a little bit with medical
assistance.
OK.
So that kind of.
Scientific numerical analysis.
It can kind of be viewed as a part of
scientific computing, but really these
are all just kind of broad words.
American analysis and kind of
scientific computing generally concerns
the study of kind of ways to compute.
Solutions to numerical problems arising
from the physical world.
Sometimes associated with kind of
problems arising from differential
equations, because differential
equations are used to model many of the
phenomenon in the physical work.
Physical world, however, I think many
of us understand that the numerical
techniques that will study in this
course are also much more broadly
applicable than just kind of PZ that
can be used in a whole variety of
conflicts, including just kind of data
analysis questions, but also for kind
of scientific problems that are not
necessarily being modeled by
differential equations.
But some kind of examples of classical
kind of scientific computing problems.
Are kind of dynamics of particles in
time and how they interact models for
kind of fluid and air flow and
engineering as well as kind of PDE
constrained America optimization.
So finding kind of optimal
configurations of some particular
object that perhaps wants to design A
relative to summon environment.
Kind of a different area, one that I've
been interested in.
This kind of quantum chemistry, which
is the study of many electron systems
where the shorter equation describes
their interaction and the goal is to
kind of understanding the probability
distribution of the particles.
So however kind of the core concepts of
the course are really linear algebra
and kind of its applications and
optimization and really kind of the
last.
5th or so, at least in the way that it
usually ends up being when I teach, it
is kind of ODEs and PDEs and application
of the metrics there.
So these kind of basic linear algebra
kernels actually underlie almost much
of everything that is done.
That is kind of large scale computing,
so it turns out that kind of we can use
matrices to model problems arising from
anything.
Kind of linear systems and linear least
squares in the medical optimization are
ubiquitous.
They show up in kind of machine
learning methods and data analysis, but
also in just about any other area of
computing that has a large data and
then wants to transform it.
And that actually needs to do kind of
large liver, large scale computing.
I think this is also reflected by the
fact that if you look at, for example,
the field of computer architecture or
compilers, and you look at the types of
benchmarks they consider, a lot of them
are essentially linear algebra or kind
of derived from American methods,
because these have been kind of the
driving force behind computing since
its inception and before so kind of
applied mathematics and kind of
computing has always been done to
fundamentally for these types of
problems.
It's kind of.
Relatively recent thing that it's about
to do all of these other things that
are useful to people as a result of,
like the prevalence of computers.
OK.
So kind of a short kind of motivating
example is kind of newtons laws of
mechanics and how they can be described
using some number of degrees of
freedom.
So.
An example of this is that for an up
and down piston or we might require
only one degree of freedom, so one
variable to represent it at one
particle system in 3D space requires 3
degrees of freedom at two particles,
system requires 6 degrees of freedom
for the two locations and two particles
at a fixed distance might require 5
degrees of freedom, so these are
essentially ways that were
parameterising particular physical
system with some number of variables
that then allow us to model how it
evolves.
Or what configuration or of it would
satisfy certain physical equations
which might provide constraints on
these degrees of freedom?
So more generally, kind of if you have
an end particle system, this will be
great described by 300 degrees of
freedom.
And so kind of.
One can in this domain thinking for
example about trajectory's.
In the configuration space.
So in this R3, N and these.
Will describe the free energy
configuration.
Which is.
What we might be looking for in the
kind of mechanical problem mechanical
engineering problem?
So there's also a variety of choices of
their representation that go beyond
just the number of degrees of freedom.
For example, the same number of degrees
of freedom might be expressed in terms
of parameters or coefficients of basis
functions, which are kind of
representing some physical space, and
the distribution of particles in that
space.
I see there is a question.
I like I click that.
Right, so here when you just five
degrees of freedom, since we've fixed
the distance.
So in a sense, we know that.
Kind of.
These are at some fixed distance D and
so once we've fixed the location here,
there's only two degrees of freedom
that are necessary to specify the
location of the Third Point, which kind
of seasonally in a rotational basis.
So we have some angles that when you
could pick.
So this is one way that it kind of the
presence of a constraint then reduces
our system.
Terms of the number degrees of freedom.
OK, and that also is kind of useful
terminology that's often used to
describe physical problems so.
A problem might be said to be very
complicated if the number of degrees of
freedoms in the millions or billions,
which kind of is a different way of
saying that you're studying a system
with many particles, many different
components, and it's something that
might require large scale computation.
Three translational to rotational.
Yeah, that's a good way.
You're not seeing those interesting.
Hold on.
It seems that I need to share in a
different way.
My laptop says sharing but my other
laptop doesn't see me sharing, so it's
not working.
Australian.
OK, there we go.
So yeah I did all this so that this
question shows up now on my on the
bottom right.
So this is probably were also very
confused when I was talking about the
high Edgar example because this was
actually showing up right here.
So if you do that kind of sent instant
message thing through late through.
Participant question shows up like
this.
So yes, indeed.
It's kind of 3.
Three translational to rotational
degrees of freedom that we would have
for this fourth point.
OK.
So to say a little bit about the
course.
So.
Kind of the steps that will take to
take to start from kind of a problem in
the continuous physical space and
reduce it to.
Kind of a concrete problem that we can
solve.
Look as follows.
So one thing that will be doing is
discretization.
Which is kind of.
The mapping of some continuous function
to some.
Discrete domain.
So for example, by imposing a grid.
And then computing values that and this
is discretization is a theme that kind
of arises throughout the course will
often want to think about continuous
models as well as different ways to
arrive at them from a collection of
points.
So interpolation innocence as well as
to fit continuous models to points as
well as to actually use discrete
collection of numbers to model a
continuous system.
So one other way kind of theme or the
course that will have that allows us to
study complicated systems is that will
map nonlinear continuous things too.
Linear, so it turns out that kind of a
sufficiently high dimensional in your
system with suffices to describe
essentially nonlinear phenomena.
Another theme that will arise is that
kind of complicated functions.
Will be mapped to polynomials.
And will work quite a bit with
polynomials throughout the course.
And similarly differential equations
will be mapped to.
Linear equations.
So do you see kind of many of the
subset will take to work with these
complex problems.
Modeling the physical world will
involve essentially linearizing them,
kind of making them discrete units and
stuffing stuff into matrices.
And finally, what will end up with our
kind of matrix problems that will then
need to solve accurately.
And it turned, and that in the self is
a massive field and a huge challenge.
So much of the queries concerns this
kind of core linear algebra aspect of
how do you actually solve linear
systems, least squares problems and.
Other things involving kind of basic
matrices as well as how to use those
tools to actually solve more
complicated problems.
So we're all kind of structure will be
as follows.
Will start with kind of the study of
error in floating point, so both kind
of in the scalar and vector sense and
will try to understand a little bit
what it means to have a different.
What are different types of sources of
error in medical simulation and
numerical computation?
How can we bound these and analyze them
to actually make sure we're computing
the right thing?
This is an innocence kind of the core
study of medical analysis is to agree
the tradeoff between kind of
computational efficiency of the
algorithm and kind of it's stability.
So it's the degree to which it's
accurate.
So having kind of laid this foundation.
Switch these will start talking about
different types of matrix computations.
So this will involve.
First of all, linear systems of
equations.
As well as least squares problems, and
then eigenvalue problems.
So these are three of the major types
of problems that arise in the Merkle
linear algebra.
So having established this kind of core
in America, linear algebra will
transition and I don't really have
enough space.
Let's continue here into.
What might be probably described as
numerical optimization?
So we'll talk about solving non linear
systems of equations as well as finding
minima of nonlinear equations which are
two problems that are kind of
fundamentally related as we also will
see in methods.
And the way that will actually go about
solving these problems is by reducing
them to matrix computations.
Then I kind of also through the use of
techniques for.
Numerical integration and
differentiation.
Will proceed to study.
Who dies?
And.
PDS which can be phrased in terms of
nonlinear optimization problems or in
terms of kind of integration problems
in some cases, and kind of via that
route eventually reduced to matrix
computations as well as the other types
of discretizations.
So as you see, kind of course has a
structure where we start and Mr Chapter
one, and it's fairly quick, is kind of
basic questions of error representation
of floating point numbers and things
like that.
Then we'll go in and talk about
numerical linear algebra and this will
be in a sense, I think a core part of
the course and also a part that you
really want to internalize, because as
we will transition into later parts
will make use of what we've learned in
this kind of medical knowledge
perception.
And from that will kind of studying
America optimization, which is useful
both for kind of later problems, will
do with differential equations, but
also outside of the domain of
differential equations altogether.
So really problem with machine
learning.
Mike, for example, also look like
nonlinear optimization problems and the
methods that will study here are very
much relevant.
OK, so that's I think much of what I
wanted to say about kind of the general
structure of the course, so hopefully
this provides some motivation of kind
of why I will start with kind of low
level technical topics and how it will
progress throughout the semester.
One challenge this semester is that I
think will have 25 total lectures, so
there are three of the lectures.
Or is it gonna be 24?
So I think three of the lectures should
be exams and I think two of the
lectures are cancelled.
Because of the fact that we don't have
spring break this semester.
But overall, this means that we
actually have fewer lectures than usual
and in previous musters the lectures
weren't necessarily enough to get
through all of the course content
anyway.
So we'll see how this works out.
I'll kind of try my best to make it at
least through the end of the PDEs.
But somewhere along the way, I'll have
to be a little bit of brief or go into
less detail will see exactly how that
works out.
I also have to balance that with,
of course, not going too fast, which is
often the challenge.
But yeah, one thing is that we might
not actually like every single chapter
in particular like the last chapter.
I think one chapter they almost never
get through is like random number
generators, but also things like the
FFT at the very end of the course.
We often don't really get to.
I think last time I thought this course
we did not get to that part.
Although maybe I said just a few words
about in the last lecture.
So this semester maybe we even don't
quite get that far, but I think that's
kind of the upper bound to a really
good.
OK.
So let's then kind of start talking a
little bit about the formalism of
problems so.
Our goal.
Kind of generally might be to be.
Given some input which say is represented
by a vector to compute and output given
by the function f applied to x.
So.
Kind of their one question we might ask
is one of those that were problem
actually a reasonable one, and in the
numerical analysis this is known as the
notion of ill posededness or well
posedness so we'll say the problem is
well posed.
If.
The solution.
Exists and is unique.
As well as.
It is continuous.
With respect.
To the input.
An otherwise
I will say.
The problem is ill post.
So in if we think of kind of our
problem as a function mapping inputs to
outputs, if it's a function that already
means a bunch of nice things, nice
things.
So assuming that we can evaluate the
function, the solution exists and is
unique.
But we might not really know whether
still it's well posed, but we need the
other thing we need for it to be well
posed is for it to be continuous and.
This is enforced,
for example, by making sure that the
derivative of x
It is never Infinity, so it's never a
nascent.
So as long as our function doesn't have
such asymptotes, it will be continuous
everywhere, and that's good enough.
And within here we.
Somewhere implicitly we have in mind
that domain, so here we picked.
x to come from R^n.
So R^n is kind of real vectors of
dimension n, but we might restrict our
domain and only consider some subset of
kind of vectors x within R^n and then
ask if all these of these conditions
apply over that domain.
We might also ask you what is kind of
is it is this problem well posed for a
particular X, so we just have a single
input in mind and the question is kind
of still largely makes sense.
So this kind of domain for which we're
considering a problem is important, and
this also makes sense from a computer
science perspective.
So in a sense you want to specify
ultimately an algorithm for computing F
of X, and your algorithm should be able
to handle a variety of inputs X coming
from some domain.
And it should work for all X in the
domain and you kind of want to if you
are considering error, you want to
analyze the worst case behavior of your
algorithm over potential inputs.
So it kind of some worst case input
will force you to divide by zero.
That's something you want to know.
OK, so that is kind of a notion of well
posed or ill posed.
Is there any questions or am I missing
any shot?
It seems there's questions, but I missed
them.
Or it seems that there was just a cat on
the keyboard.
There was a question about the lectures
being recorded, so the lectures will be
recorded and the recordings will be
placed on media space.
Encourage you also use this instant
message thing for questions because
like I don't really get notifications
for this in chat, so the question is
actually to do with something urgent.
I won't be able to answer it and I can
relate to the cat on the keyboard
problem.
You might see my cat not too long from
now.
OK.
So let's then talk about error.
So.
For error there is.
Kind of.
So kind of the most basic thing we can
talk about is say, why is the true
solution to our problem of computing f
for an input X.
But instead.
computed y hat right
so some other.
Some other result, perhaps?
We computed it because we applied f
inaccurately, so we have instead applied
f hat.
So then our absolute error.
And as we'll soon know, this is the
absolute forward error.
Will be given what by the difference
between
y
and... y hat and y.
Often I get the question of does the
sign matter and also note that there is
a sign right?
So what matters that there is that
there is a sign what the sign is.
I myself can't remember.
I just have to look up on the slide.
So whether it's y minus, y hat or
y hat minus
y doesn't matter as long as you're
consistent about in your analysis.
But the sign does matter and.
The magnitude of the error is
something, so sometimes you will see
discussion of error and it has implied
in it that we're talking about
magnitude.
Other times will say explicitly that we
thought would want to consider the
magnitude of the error, but within
analysis itself often we want to
consider error not just in magnitude
but also in sign.
One reason for this is that we might
have multiple errors and they could
cancel and.
Cancellation of errors can actually
kind of result in a better error
analysis.
You see that in fact everything is OK.
OK.
So that's our absolute error and I see
your question.
They won't be in the.
I'm not sure what the campus page
actually is, but yeah, I will be
posting them on media space.
I think I actually have to post them on
media space for DRES accommodation
purposes.
I haven't worked with media space
before and what I actually did in, for
example the previous semesters post all
lectures on my personal website.
If there's issues with media space, I
will also do that and then just post
the links as well as links to the
transcript directly on the course web
page.
But I for now will try to just use
media space and I'll update the relate
web page with the media space link.
So hopefully that works, but I did hear
that there's been problems with media
space in the past.
So we'll hopefully that won't be the
case for us.
Yep, OK.
So that's the absolute error the.
Relative error in this case, again,
referring to the forward error, will
simply be Delta y / y.
Or in particular with the magnitude of
y.
Yeah, I'm surprised they don't have a
magnitude in my slide.
Soon I will.
All set up.
And that will be again posted,
unrelated.
OK, so that's the kind of notions of
absolute error and relative error, and
these are fairly standard.
So let's talk a little bit about where
error can actually come from.
So one basic source of error is
representation of numbers.
And what will focus on in this course
is notion of floating point
representations.
Like this which.
So kind of a more basic example is that
we.
Cannot represent.
Pie on a computer, right to we simply
can't store all the digits necessary to
represent an irrational number.
So typically also.
Kind of in practice.
We're limited to 32 or 64 bit
representations of floating point.
Actually, floating point is become also
a hot topic.
Research wise more recently because.
These days there's also 8 and 16 bit.
Floating point representations
motivated by the desire to do low
precision computation, which in the
field of machine learning is been shown
to be kind of Bible, while
traditionally actually much you kind of
scientific computing in American
Alesis, you assume double precision and
you do everything in double precision
or double precision means you use 64
bit representations of numbers.
So you kind of use in a sense of
precision you can get.
Typically because kind of working with
that's a problem that will talk about
you actually want a lot of accuracy and
you're trying to get a lot of accuracy.
So are we will kind of talk about is
floating point numbers which try to
maintain insofar as possible a uniform
precision.
For any given number that they're
representing an in the sense of kind of
floating point really is scientific
notation.
So its scientific computing course, and
one thing that we all learned, for
example in chemistry, is just how
important these scientific notation is.
One we want to carry through a given.
Level of accuracy, specifically by
scientific notation, I mean, we might
say that we have 2.103
Moles per something, right?
So kind of much like you do in
chemistry.
We do this calculations.
You tried to make a measurement which
gives you some amount of accuracy and
then you try to carry through
calculations that done maintain that
number of digits of accuracy.
And what we're really doing there, and
what would happen is that you might
make a measurement, and you might
measure something in liters.
But then you might talk about something
in terms of like moles, right where the
exponent now is completely different,
so this might be 2.13 * 10 to 23, or 10
to the minus 23.
And that doesn't matter.
We still have the same relative
accuracy, so we still have kind of
error in this 4th 4th bit.
So in that sense, if it notation has
uniform precision, no matter what the
magnitude of the number is.
So even if it's kind of some tiny
fraction talking about something at the
scale of electrons or huge number,
talking about something at the scale of
galaxies.
We can represent them all with the same
type of notation and similarly floating
point will essentially kind of provide
a way... provide a data structure for
scientific notation.
Right and so.
Given x
we'll say that the floating point
representation is FL of X.
And generally, for most choices of X
and will be precise about that soon.
The relative error of this
representation or the magnitude of the relative
error to be precise.
So FL of X -- X divided by kind of the
right answer, which is just X, will be
less than or equal to some fixed
precision epsilon and will soon learn
that this epsilon, so the
representation.
Error of our floating point system is
called.
Machine epsilon is kind of critical for
analysis of.
The propagation of error due to
floating point representation within
computations.
So.
Floating point brings up I related
notion which although in no means is
restricted to floating point, which is
propagated data error.
So.
Often were not given the true input X
to some degree, but some approximation
of it so.
We're given some X hat which is close
to axe.
And then we get the error F of X at
minus F of X.
So even if we compute exactly, we might
be computing it for a slightly
incorrect input.
An example of this is maybe our input
was.
I'm measurement that we made by I on in
chemistry using some kind of measure.
So there we had some error and then we
ultimately input a number into the
computer, which is some approximation
and that has some number of digits of
accuracy.
Everything beyond those digits of
accuracy is garbage.
Maybe will claim with zero, but in fact
we don't know anything about it.
So that would be an example of
propagated data error.
Another kind of innocence.
We're thinking about propagated data
error.
Is that maybe we have some real numbers
and as soon as we put them into
computer we need to do FL of the real
number right?
So that will introduce a little bit of
floating point error and that's kind of
error to our original input and we
could ask how that propagates.
But floating Point will then also
perhaps cause further errors during the
computation, and we can then maybe need
to think about how those propagate
throughout the computation.
But in general will be focused on two
types of error, so kind of if we
consider the computed out of X versus
the true F of X, the error the main
sources of error are rounding error,
which is errors due to floating point.
Anne truncation error, which is errors
due to approximating F.
Without that.
So in a sense, this is due to using
some approximate algorithm.
One example is that instead of
computing a function, we might compute
a Taylor expansion, which is accurate
to in some sense.
And so whenever we then kind of make
approximation to a function and try to
compute the result and compare it to
the true solution, this will refer to
as a truncation error.
So in that sense, this is method versus
the true solution, assuming the method
is computed with exact arithmetic in
exact arithmetic, is a common phrase
and kind of medical analysis to say
without the use of floating point, that
is without rounding error.
So again, a rounding error being.
A fellow X -- X right there.
Let's see I miss any questions on this
chat.
Not yet.
OK, so these are the basic sources of
error that will analyze any questions
so far.
OK, let's continue.
So forward error.
We've already talked about.
A little bit will be the.
Error in what we compute, so this is
kind of again app out of X -- F of X.
But a different notion that is
important in the medical analysis and
often can be used to bound the error
when there's not a bounding forward
error or to obtain a better bound is a
notion of backward error.
So with backward error, what we're
actually going to ask is.
So suppose we computed.
Out parallax, so really we took an
input and we computed the wrong thing,
but did we compute the right answer for
some perturbed input?
So.
Is there some?
Ex, hab.
For which.
F of X hat.
So the true function applied to X hat
is equal to a FedEx.
And if so.
X hat minus X is.
Our backward air.
So this is saying that.
We actually computed the true solution
to a slightly perturbed problem.
And this is in a sense, a certification
that we computed this equality because
typically what were given as input has
some degree of inaccuracy, right?
So we talked about this data
propagation error.
So for example, it could be a.
So if we can derive a backward error
bound that says.
We've got so many digits of accuracy
for this type of input.
In now, in the sense that the digits of
accuracy are digits of accuracy on your
input, so kind of.
We might have computed the solution to
an input that was kind of erroneous in
the 4th digit, so a 4th digit
perturbation to your input would have
given would have given the result that
you compute.
And this type of analysis can be useful
in demonstrating that the error small.
There's a good picture to kind of keep
track of what's going on, which I have
here, so we start with kind of some
true value X.
We compute the true up of X, so that's
here, and so the difference between F
of X and the head of X, which is our
kind of inaccurate algorithm for this
problem, it is going to be the forward
error.
However, if we can also find an X hat
for which the true F applied to X hat.
Is equal to?
How to vex?
So the main equation to keep in mind
here being apart of X need to equal X
hat, then X -- X hat is our backward
error.
So typically done in the medical
analysis one we want to show that an
algorithm is stable, which is typically
implies that the algorithm does not
have too much forward air or backward
error.
Which can be analyzed, kind of in a
perturbative way, or.
Somewhat differently, depending on the
exact setting, but generally we're
looking to bound one of these two types
of errors as a way to certify the fact
that our algorithms computing right
now.
OK.
Any questions about decorator?
I think there is a question.
So one question is what is the
difference between these two values?
So here this is, we've applied.
A different function to the true input,
so here kind of.
I've had this some approximation of F.
And here we apply computed the true
function on a perturbed input.
So here ex had some approximation or is
nearby X.
Yeah.
OK, great any other questions.
Right, so one question.
Is this actually always true?
Yeah, so.
To bond the backward error, we need to
be able to find something like this,
but whether we're actually able to is a
different question.
It could be that such an accident does
not exist, and we might not have an
error bound in that case.
But for in many cases, especially in
linear algebra, when there is kind of
in a sense of 1 to one mapping, one can
guarantee that the session had exists
and that it's not too far away, and so
your backward error is nice and
bounded, but it's certainly not going
to be always true for an arbitrary
problem.
Good question as well.
OK.
Feel free to post more questions.
But let's go.
OK, so the other one important notion
that relating to error.
That's kind of a function of the
problem and not the actual algorithm is
condition.
And let me emphasize that this is a
function of a problem, so if I'm not up
yet.
So the condition number is a measure of
how much a perturbation to the input
can be amplified.
Once we actually compute F so.
In particular, if we consider the
absolute condition number, so say Kappa
of F.
And let's also say of F for the input
X.
So.
That will be the limit of some
perturbation Delta X.
Going to zero out of.
F of X plus Delta X.
Minus F of X divided by Delta X.
There's a question going back to back
with error regarding how to calculate X
hat.
So.
Typically what you could do, for
example is.
Well, one way is you could if he could
bond the forward error and that
innocence.
Is the difference that you need to?
Kind of compute.
So you can adjust the input to take
that into account, and this is easy.
If, for example, we are computing a
linear function, so then we could say
we have this difference.
So we just need to increase our input
by that amount and we can directly
compute it.
And this is a function of.
This is due to the function being
linear, but if it's not then this is no
longer guaranteed in the sense we need
to apply the reciprocal of the
function.
But typically we will kind of show that
there exists some perturbation to the
input for which what we've computed is
actually correct.
One reason that this might help is that
if the source of error in our
truncation error of our algorithm is
actually due to some change in the
input or something we computed, we can
kind of model that as a change in the
input.
It could be that our algorithm starts
by just approximating the input and
then computing something.
Then I just have a simple bound in the
backward error, right?
So we've actually computed look at that
first approximation, and I say actually
changed X by a little bit, and so this
changes the result.
Yeah, there's lots of other questions.
Let me try to keep up with everything.
Is there any example of that we need to
compute backward error?
Not exactly sure I understand the
question.
So.
Typically we would be interested in
bounding backward error, so we don't
necessarily want to compute what with.
The error is for a particular input, we
want to just say that for any input in
this domain are what we would compute.
It will be close to the true solution
in the sense that we will have computed
something for a slightly perturbed
problem, typically.
So typically this is not something we
kind of computing the program, but do
offline and theoretical analysis.
So perhaps that.
Answer the question, but let me know if
it does not quite.
But if there's multiple X hats that
satisfy the condition.
It's somewhat context dependent.
If that's actually the case, we often
not really be interested in the
backward error analysis or not be doing
it.
So again, like this often will be done
in linear algebra when you have a
linear mapping, but.
So you could you might be interested in
just showing that there exists an X hat
that's kind of close by and that would
suffice for a certification.
That kind of the answer is accurate, so
I guess typically it is showing that
one exists, but in most contexts only
one will exist, at least in the context
of what we want to do.
That for stability analysis.
How do we know errors due to Exeter?
I've had given that there is an error.
Right, so in reality, when computing
you don't really know, right?
So you get some error and you're not
really sure that's why we kind of need
to go back and potentially do analysis
and understand what are the different
sources of error, but kind of when
actually computing stuff.
Everything looks alike and there was
general the only way you would actually
get a backward error is if you could
apply like the inverse of the function
exactly.
Then you would be able to get like a
concrete X hat.
That's often not the case, although
perhaps if we're kind of testing an
algorithm.
They were testing algorithm for solving
a linear system of equations.
If we had an exact algorithm for
computing matrix vector product then we
could compute given some solution X hat
that's approximate to ax equals B.
We could compute a * X hat and that
will give us a baby hat and then we can
look at the difference between B&B had
to estimate the backward error.
So that's one common example of 1.
This is actually computable.
Right and then I'm getting lots of
condition.
Number of questions that I think are
going to answer in a second anyway.
Right, so this Delta is nothing to do
with the Dirac Delta, so if you like we
can switch notation.
And use.
The step of Delta X.
Although that doctor can also be
confused about those things.
Right, and so indeed this is simply.
A prime of X the derivative at X.
And so let's.
And I will talk about this condition
number in the condition of our matrix
shortly.
So in particular, the relative
condition number.
Will be related to the Matrix
condition, number matrix condition
number.
Is.
Kind of a special thing because we just
say that this is a condition number of
matrix, but conditioning you should
think about this is the conditioning of
a problem.
So for example, I might ask you what
the conditioning of matrix vector
product is with respect to
perturbations in input X.
So the vector that we're multiplying by
where I might ask you what is the
conditioning of the linear system with
respect to perturbations to the right
hand side we had in both cases.
Actually the answer will be that the
conditioning conditioning is the matrix
condition number.
So the matrix condition number is kind
of the salute.
The right conditioning bound for a
number of important linear algebra
problems, and we'll talk about that in
a lot of detail.
In a lecture or two.
Pump pump.
OK, I think I've answered most of the
questions.
Let's perhaps go on a little bit and
talk and kind of define the condition
number and stop there for today.
So let's talk a little bit about the
intuition of what's going on here.
So we're kind of saying that.
Suppose we have some function F.
And.
No, maybe it's not changing too much.
And then maybe all of a suddenly
changes a lot and then maybe not too
much again.
So if I look.
And say OK, maybe access here.
Then if I change XA little bit.
So by Delta X.
App will not change too much right?
So in that sense, at this point F as.
If I look over here and if X happens to
be here, and if I change it slightly,
then up of exchange is drastically so.
In that sense we have an ill
conditioned problem.
So here is we would say ill
conditioned.
More generally.
We might say that the condition number
of F is given as the maximum of over X.
In some domain so.
Let's say our domain is the real
numbers.
Of this
Kappa Alpha vax
So of all this stuff.
So generally we want to consider the
maximum possible amplification over a
set of inputs and so for example, for
the matrix condition number there must
be that.
OK.
And then for the relative condition
number, we now simply want to say that
Kappa F of X will be.
In a limit of kind of reprobation going
to 0.
And now we look.
Not at the absolute error, but at the
relative error.
And similarly for the perturbation, we
consider it to be a relative
perturbation in terms of magnitude.
So now we have relative perturbation in
output divided by relative perturbation
input and again.
So maybe this one will Kappa abs.
So our cap here for F over some domain
will be again the maximum of over X and
some domain, let's call it denial of
Kappa of.
F of X and so this relative condition
number will primarily be the condition
number we're interested in just
relative error is primarily the error
we're actually interested in practice.
Right, and so this kind of conditioning
is something that will now study for
every problem that we will consider an
will innocence, quantify how difficult
it is to contain an accurate answer to
a particular problem, and just how much
we can get perturbed in the solution.
If the input is slightly wrong.
So if the problem is really badly
conditioned, it becomes kind of
incomputable and actually formally.
If the condition number goes to
Infinity then innocence F is
discontinuous.
So right that the derivative is
Infinity.
And in that sense, the problem is built
post.
OK, so with that I will stop.
And perhaps I'm still happy to answer
some questions, but we should stop an
interesting time.
Is there any assignments or quizzes you
after this class?
There is a quiz for you all do for next
Wednesday by the start of class, which
is just about the course policies.
So please complete that and keep an eye
out for further assignments on the web
page an on Piazza.
And again, office hours will post
shortly after class this afternoon.
Thanks for trying.
Yes, this Wednesday.
To order this class.
In the past I've had to sign a form, I
presume like now that's more like an
email.
Actually, I'm not sure.
But it should be possible.
There was a question of why do we take
a Max over D.
So in general we want to consider
maximizing over the input domain, so
for whatever actually want to consider
what is the condition number.
So for the matrix condition number, for
example, we want to consider perhaps
any non 0X.
Might be a reasonable input, but in
some other cases maybe you want to
restrict X to be from some vector
space.
Or maybe we have a particular kind of
interval on the real line.
All of those are reasonable inputs.
Absolute value certainly could have
been missed.
Yeah, we probably should have.
In general, the condition number is a
positive number.
So.
It doesn't hurt to take absolute values
everywhere.
Thanks for the correction.